% PacBio Assembly

# 1. Introduction
Most shotgun sequencing methods use huge amount of short fragments to assemble
the whole DNA sequence. However, new sequencing instruments from Pacific
Biosciences can sequence much longer fragments of DNA than any other sequencing
technology over 2000bp compared to 100-500bp, but at a much higher error rate
(typically 15% error). The long read length makes the instruments very
attractive for de novo assembly of complex genomes, but the high error rate
prevents traditional approaches from being used. 

In this paper, we propose two possible methods to assemble the long fragments
with the high error rate. Both methods aim at eliminating errors by using high
coverage of the long fragments. One is using Spaced Seed and the other is using
Spectral Alignment and Error Correction [Pevzner 2001].  The critical part for
both methods is to find overlapped fragments, which will makes error correcting
relatively easy by alignment and voting. 

# 2. Spaced Seed 
One of our basic ideas to solve this problem is removing single base sequencing
errors by voting in overlapped regions. Since we have 30x to 100x coverage reads
of a few strains of E. coli and for each base the accuracy rate is about 85%,
   the voting method seems to be attractive. But the size of the problem is very
   large. The brutal algorithm of comparing each fragment against each other
   fragment with $O(n^2)$ running time is unacceptable. Thus efficient and
   accurate overlap detection is critical to solving our problem.

## 2.1. Seed Method

We consider the strategy of first finding short exact "seed" matches (hits),
   which are then extended into longer overlaps. One of successful applications
   of this strategy can be seen from the original Blast paper [Altschul 1990],
   in which Blast looks for matches of $k$ (default $k=11$ in Blastn and $k=28$
           in MegaBlast) consecutive letters as seeds. But this approach to
   similarity search exhibits a key tradeoff: increasing seed size decreases
   sensitivity whereas decreasing seed size slows down the computation.
   Unfortunately, this disadvantage will be amplified in our problem. The high
   error rate makes a long match less possible, so a long consecutive seed will
   neglect many overlaps. On the other hand, short seeds lead to huge amount of
   computation.  Therefore, we must find out more sensitive seeds for the
   overlap detection.

## 2.2. Spaced Seed 

In order to alleviate this dilemma, a novel idea of using a single deterministic
and optimized spaced seed is introduced in [Ma 2002]. In that paper,
    nonconsecutive $k$ letters as seeds are used. They call the relative position
    of the $k$ letters a model, and $k$ its weight. Using this spaced seed yields a
    similarity search which is as sensitive as the one based on the naive,
    contiguous seed but produces 4 times fewer chance hits and hence is about 4
    times faster [Ma 2002]. For our long fragments assembly problem, the faster
    and more sensitive spaced seed would be of great use. 

At first glance, it seems surprising that spaced seeds could have an advantage
over contiguous ones. But we can see that from some studies of the theoretical
and practical aspects of optimal seeds. Further more, an algorithmic solution to
the problem of finding the optimal seed are offered [Keich 2004].

## 2.3. Good Spaced Seed 

The next step is finding some good seeds for our problem. Actually, multiple,
    possibly randomized, spaced patterns, spaced q-grams, and spaced probes used
    in some other regions are also studied. For example, seeds are designed for
    speeding up local alignment [Choi 2003]. They find out that the best spaced
    seed of weight 9 is `11*11*1*1***111` and the best of weight 10 is
    `11*11***11*1*111` (1s correspond to the matching positions) [Choi 2003]. 

Considering the similarity between the local alignment and our problem, we can
start to find overlaps by using those best seeds. Or we can use similar methods
to find out our own best seeds. In general, using sensitive spaced seeds can
help us find the overlaps between long fragments efficiently.


# 3. Spectral Alignment and Error Correction 
In addition to spaced seed, we present another potential method to correct read
errors in this section. To do that, a good start point is to study the error
pattern in the reads. By aligning reads of an already known sequence against
itself, we can work out the probability of all kinds of errors. Once this error
model is obtained from training data, it can be used to measure distance between
reads in a similar manner of Point Accepted Mutations (PAM). 

## 3.1. Spectral Alignment and Error Correction
A potential method to solve the problem is use the Spectral Alignment and Error
Correction algorithm in [Pevzner 2001]. Actually, [Pevzner 2001] is not directly
applicable to our problem. Spectral Alignment and Error Correction required an
initial *spectrum*, which is a collection of solid $l$-tuples (short reads of
        length $l$) from the right DNA sequence we try to obtain. The error rate
is so high for our long reads that there is no way to guarantee $l$-tuples from
them are solid. However, thanks to the high coverage of fragments, it is likely
to get a small spectrum using the "overlap-layout-consensus" paradigm. Start
from the small spectrum, we can iteratively correct more fragments and add their
corrected $l$-tuples into the spectrum. During the iteration, the spectrum
itself will gradually becomes more valid as well. Then the key problem becomes
how to find overlapped fragments. 

## 3.2. Overlap Detection Using Base Statistics 
Overlapped fragments can come from several sources: 1) repeats in DNA sequence,
            2) accident match due to errors, 3) and coverage overlaps during
            sequencing. The third case is one that can help eliminate errors and
            establish our initial spectrum. Fortunately, a big advantage of long
            reads is that it makes the first two cases difficult to appear.
            First, it is rare for DNA to have such long repeats. If the DNA does
            have very long repeats, fragments of all sizes face the same problem
            and long fragments only alleviate this problem compared to short
            ones. In case of these long repeats, the Eulerian Superpath method
            presented in [Pevzner 2001] can be employed to solve the problem.
            Second, the long length of fragments makes accident match almost
            impossible even considering its high error rate.  Therefore, it is
            safe to take consensus of large-number of long overlapped fragments
            as valid.

Let us consider the problem of matching overlapped fragments. A naive way is to
pair fragments and measure their distance. As another advantage, long reads
somehow facilitate this matching because, under same coverage, the number of
reads is relatively small. For E. Coli, which is 4.6 million base pairs in
length, the number of 2000-base-long reads is 2300 when coverage is 1. However,
    2300 is still large if we try to measure the distance between each pair of
    them, even not considering the high coverage. We need some efficient
    heuristic algorithm to select candidates of pairs, which are likely to match
    with high probability. One possible approach is to group reads by features
    relatively robust to local changes, for example, base statistics. If bases
    are changed to other bases randomly with equal probability, then base
    statistics will keep the same despite errors. Otherwise, the error model we
    trained can be used to adjust the bias. Similar ideas, like robust signal
    hashing, has been successfully applied in multimedia for copy detecting
    [Roover 2005]. Afterwards, instead of brutally matching all pairs, we can
    take two reads from a same group or close groups as candidates. 

With those candidates, we can employ the [Ukkonen 1985] algorithm in time
$O(t^2)$ to tell if the distance between them is within our threshold ($t$) or
not. For 2000-base-long reads with 15% error rate, a simple threshold is the
edit distance incurred by errors, which makes 300 a reasonable value for $t$.
Because [Ukkonen 1985] algorithm runs in time $O(t^2)$, it is quite fast to rule out
mismatches.  Those matched fragments will be further aligned with each other.
Then, their consensus will be used to correct errors and to establish the
initial spectrum. 

# 4. Conclusion
We have studied two possible methods to use the long fragments for DNA assembly.
The key point for both methods is to eliminate errors using consensus of
overlapped fragments. Thanks to the high coverage, it is likely that most errors
will be corrected. As long as fragments overlaps can be detected efficiently, the
assembly of corrected long fragments should be relatively easy. 

# References

[Altschul 1990] S. F. Altschul, W. Gish, W. Miller, E. Myers, D. J. Lipman,
    Basic local alignment search tool, J. Mol. Biol., 215 (1990), 403-410.

[Ma 2002] B. Ma, J. Tromp, M. Li, Pattern Hunter–faster and more sensitive
homology search. Bioinformatics, 18 (2002), 440-445.

[Keich 2004] U. Keich, B. Ma, M. Li, and J. Tromp, On spaced seeds for
similarity search, Discrete Applied Mathematics 138 (3) (2004), 253–263.

[Choi 2003] K. Choi, F. Zeng, and L. Zhang, Good spaced seeds for homology
search.  Bioinformatics 20 (2003), 1053-1056.

[Ukkonen 1985] E. Ukkonen, Algorithms For Approximate String Matching,
    Information and Control, 64 (1985), 100-118. 

[Roover 2005] C. De Roover, C. De Vleeschouwer, F. Lefebvre, B. Macq, Robust
video hashing based on radial projections of key frames, IEEE Transactions on
Signal Processing, 53 (10), 2005, 4020-4037. 

[Pevzner 2001] P. A. Pevzner, H. Tang, and M. S. Waterman. 2001, A New Approach
to Fragment Assembly in DNA Sequencing, Proceedings of the Fifth Annual
International Conference on Computational Biology (RECOMB '01), New York, NY,
              256-267.
